
@node Array multi
@section Multicomponent and complex arrays
@cindex Array multicomponent
@cindex multicomponent arrays

Multicomponent arrays have elements which are vectors.  Examples of such
arrays are vector fields, colour images (which contain, say, RGB tuples),
and multispectral images.  Complex-valued arrays can also be regarded as
multicomponent arrays, since each element is a 2-tuple of real values.

Here are some examples of multicomponent arrays:

@cindex RGB24 example

@example
// A 3-dimensional array; each element is a length 3 vector of float
Array<TinyVector<float,3>,3> A;  

// A complex 2-dimensional array
Array<complex<double>,2> B;

// A 2-dimensional image containing RGB tuples
struct RGB24 @{
  unsigned char r, g, b;
@};

Array<RGB24,2> C;
@end example

@subsection Extracting components

@cindex extracting components
@cindex Array extracting components

Blitz++ provides some special support for such arrays.  The most important
is the ability to extract a single component.  For example:

@example
Array<TinyVector<float,3>,2> A(128,128);
Array<float,2> B = A.extractComponent(float(), 1, 3);
B = 0;
@end example

The call to @code{extractComponent} returns an array of floats; this array
is a view of the second component of each element of A.  The arguments of
@code{extractComponent} are: (1) the type of the component (in this example,
float); (2) the component number to extract (numbered 0, 1, ... N-1); and
(3) the number of components in the array.

This is a little bit messy, so Blitz++ provides a handy shortcut using
@code{operator[]}:

@example
Array<TinyVector<float,3>,2> A(128,128);
A[1] = 0;
@end example

The number inside the square brackets is the component number.  However, for
this operation to work, Blitz++ has to already know how many components
there are, and what type they are.  It knows this already for
@code{TinyVector} and @code{complex<T>}.  If you use your own type, though,
you will have to tell Blitz++ this information using the macro
@code{BZ_DECLARE_MULTICOMPONENT_TYPE()}.  This macro has three arguments:

@findex BZ_DECLARE_MULTICOMPONENT_TYPE

@example
BZ_DECLARE_MULTICOMPONENT_TYPE(T_element, T_componentType, numComponents)
@end example

@code{T_element} is the element type of the array.  @code{T_componentType}
is the type of the components of that element.  @code{numComponents} is the
number of components in each element.

An example will clarify this.  Suppose we wanted to make a colour image,
stored in 24-bit HSV (hue-saturation-value) format.  We can make a class
@code{HSV24} which represents a single pixel:

@cindex HSV24 example

@example
#include <blitz/array.h>

using namespace blitz;

class HSV24 @{
public:
    // These constants will makes the code below cleaner; we can
    // refer to the components by name, rather than number.

    static const int hue=0, saturation=1, value=2;

    HSV24() @{ @}
    HSV24(int hue, int saturation, int value)
      : h_(hue), s_(saturation), v_(value)
    @{ @}

    // Some other stuff here, obviously

private:
    unsigned char h_, s_, v_;
@};
@end example

Right after the class declaration, we will invoke the macro
@code{BZ_DECLARE_MULTICOMPONENT_TYPE} to tell Blitz++ about HSV24:

@example
// HSV24 has 3 components of type unsigned char
BZ_DECLARE_MULTICOMPONENT_TYPE(HSV24, unsigned char, 3);
@end example

Now we can create HSV images and modify the individual components:

@example
int main()
@{
    Array<HSV24,2> A(128,128);   // A 128x128 HSV image
    ...

    // Extract a greyscale version of the image
    Array<unsigned char,2> A_greyscale = A[HSV24::value];

    // Bump up the saturation component to get a
    // pastel effect
    A[HSV24::saturation] *= 1.3; 

    // Brighten up the middle of the image
    Range middle(32,96);
    A[HSV24::value](middle,middle) *= 1.2;
@}
@end example

@subsection Special support for complex arrays

@cindex Array complex
@cindex complex arrays

Since complex arrays are used frequently, Blitz++ provides two special
methods for getting the real and imaginary components:

@example
Array<complex<float>,2> A(32,32);

real(A) = 1.0;
imag(A) = 0.0;
@end example

The function @code{real(A)} returns an array view of the real component;
@code{imag(A)} returns a view of the imaginary component.

Note: Blitz++ provides numerous math functions defined over complex-valued
arrays, such as @code{conj}, @code{polar}, @code{arg}, @code{abs},
@code{cos}, @code{pow}, etc.  See the section on math functions
(@ref{Math functions 1}) for details.

@subsection Zipping together expressions
@cindex zipping expressions
@cindex Array zipping expressions

Blitz++ provides a function @code{zip()} which lets you combine two or more
expressions into a single component.  For example, you can combine two real
expressions into a complex expression, or three integer expressions into an
HSV24 expression.  The function has this syntax:

@example
resultexpr zip(expr1, expr2, T_element)
resultexpr zip(expr1, expr2, expr3, T_element)         ** not available yet
resultexpr zip(expr1, expr2, expr3, expr4, T_element)  ** not available yet
@end example

The types @code{resultexpr}, @code{expr1} and @code{expr2} are array
expressions.  The third argument is the type you want to create.  For
example:

@example
int N = 16;
Array<complex<float>,1> A(N);
Array<float,1> theta(N);

 ...

A = zip(cos(theta), sin(theta), complex<float>());
@end example

The above line is equivalent to:

@example
for (int i=0; i < N; ++i)
   A[i] = complex<float>(cos(theta[i]), sin(theta[i]));
@end example

