
@node Array storage
@section Array storage orders
@cindex Array storage formats
@cindex storage of arrays

Blitz++ is very flexible about the way arrays are stored in memory.
Starting indices can be 0, 1, or arbitrary numbers; arrays can be stored in
row major, column major or an order based on any permutation of the
dimensions; each dimension can be stored in either ascending or descending
order.  An N dimensional array can be stored in @math{N! 2^N} possible ways.

Before getting into the messy details, a review of array storage formats is
useful.  If you're already familiar with strides and bases, you might
want to skip on to the next section.

@subsection Fortran and C-style arrays

Suppose we want to store this two-dimensional array in memory:

@example
[ 1 2 3 ]
[ 4 5 6 ]
[ 7 8 9 ]
@end example

@unnumberedsubsubsec Row major vs. column major

To lay the array out in memory, it's necessary to map the indices (i,j) into
a one-dimensional block.  Here are two ways the array might appear in
memory:

@example
[ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 ]
[ 1 4 7 2 5 8 3 6 9 ]
@end example

The first order corresponds to a C or C++ style array, and is called
@emph{row-major ordering}: the data is stored first by row, and then by
column.  The second order corresponds to a Fortran style array, and is
called @emph{column-major ordering}: the data is stored first by column, and
then by row.

The simplest way of mapping the indices (i,j) into one-dimensional memory is
to take a linear combination.@footnote{Taking a linear combination is
sufficient for dense, asymmetric arrays, such as are provided by the Blitz++
@code{Array} class.}  Here's the appropriate linear combination for row
major ordering:

@example
memory offset = 3*i + 1*j
@end example

And for column major ordering:

@example
memory offset = 1*i + 3*j
@end example

The coefficients of the (i,j) indices are called @emph{strides}.  For a row
major storage of this array, the @emph{row stride} is 3 -- you have to skip
three memory locations to move down a row.  The @emph{column stride} is 1 --
you move one memory location to move to the next column.  This is also known
as @emph{unit stride}.  For column major ordering, the row and column
strides are 1 and 3, respectively.

@unnumberedsubsubsec Bases

To throw another complication into this scheme, C-style arrays have indices
which start at zero, and Fortran-style arrays have indices which start at
one.  The first valid index value is called the @emph{base}.  To account for
a non-zero base, it's necessary to include an offset term in addition to the
linear combination.  Here's the mapping for a C-style array with i=0..3 and
j=0..3:

@example
memory offset =  0 + 3*i + 1*j
@end example

No offset is necessary since the indices start at zero for C-style arrays.
For a Fortran-style array with i=1..4 and j=1..4, the mapping would be:

@example
memory offset = -4 + 3*i + 1*j
@end example

By default, Blitz++ creates arrays in the C-style storage format (base zero,
row major ordering).  To create a Fortran-style array, you can use this
syntax:

@example
Array<int,2> A(3, 3, FortranArray<2>());
@end example

The third parameter, @code{FortranArray<2>()}, tells the @code{Array}
constructor to use a storage format appropriate for two-dimensional Fortran
arrays (base one, column major ordering).

A similar object, @code{ColumnMajorArray<N>}, tells the @code{Array} constructor
to use column major ordering, with base zero:

@example
Array<int,2> B(3, 3, ColumnMajorArray<2>());
@end example

This creates a 3x3 array with indices i=0..2 and j=0..2.

In addition to supporting the 0 and 1 conventions for C and Fortran-style
arrays, Blitz++ allows you to choose arbitrary bases, possibly different for
each dimension.  For example, this declaration creates an array whose
indices have ranges i=5..8 and j=2..5:

@example
Array<int,2> A(Range(5,8), Range(2,5));
@end example

@subsection Creating custom storage orders

@cindex storage order, creating your own
@cindex Array storage order, creating your own

All @code{Array} constructors take an optional parameter of type
@code{GeneralArrayStorage<N_rank>}.  This parameter encapsulates a complete
description of the storage format.  If you want a storage format other than
C or Fortran-style, you have two choices:

@itemize @bullet

@item      You can create an object of type
@code{GeneralArrayStorage<N_rank>}, customize the storage format, and use
the object as a argument for the @code{Array} constructor.

@item      You can create your own storage format object which inherits from
@code{GeneralArrayStorage<N_rank>}.  This is useful if you will be using the
storage format many times.  This approach (inheriting from
@code{GeneralArrayStorage<N_rank>}) was used to create the
@code{FortranArray<N_rank>} objects.  If you want to take this approach, you
can use the declaration of @code{FortranArray<N_rank>} in
@code{<blitz/array.h>} as a guide.

@end itemize

The next sections describe how to modify a
@code{GeneralArrayStorage<N_rank>} object to suit your needs.

@unnumberedsubsubsec In higher dimensions

In more than two dimensions, the choice of storage order becomes more
complicated.  Suppose we had a 3x3x3 array.  To map the indices (i,j,k) into
memory, we might choose one of these mappings:

@example
memory offset = 9*i + 3*j + 1*k
memory offset = 1*i + 3*j + 9*k
@end example

The first corresponds to a C-style array, and the second to a Fortran-style
array.  But there are other choices; we can permute the strides (1,3,9) any
which way:

@example
memory offset = 1*i + 9*j + 3*k
memory offset = 3*i + 1*j + 9*k
memory offset = 3*i + 9*j + 1*k
memory offset = 9*i + 1*j + 3*k
@end example

For an N dimensional array, there are N! such permutations.  Blitz++ allows
you to select any permutation of the dimensions as a storage order.  First
you need to create an object of type @code{GeneralArrayStorage<N_rank>}:

@example
GeneralArrayStorage<3> storage;
@end example

@code{GeneralArrayStorage<N_rank>} contains a vector called @code{ordering}
which controls the order in which dimensions are stored in memory.  The
@code{ordering} vector will contain a permutation of the numbers 0, 1, ...,
N_rank-1.  Since some people are used to the first dimension being 1 rather
than 0, a set of symbols (firstDim, secondDim, ..., eleventhDim) are
provided which make the code more legible.  

The @code{ordering} vector lists the dimensions in increasing order of
stride.  You can access this vector using the member function
@code{ordering()}.  A C-style array, the default, would have:

@example
storage.ordering() = thirdDim, secondDim, firstDim;
@end example

meaning that the third index (k) is associated with the smallest stride, and
the first index (i) is associated with the largest stride.  A Fortran-style
array would have:

@example
storage.ordering() = firstDim, secondDim, thirdDim;
@end example

@unnumberedsubsubsec Reversed dimensions

To add yet another wrinkle, there are some applications where the rows or
columns need to be stored in reverse order.@footnote{For example, certain
bitmap formats store image rows from bottom to top rather than top to
bottom.}

Blitz++ allows you to store each dimension in either ascending or descending
order.  By default, arrays are always stored in ascending order.  The
@code{GeneralArrayStorage<N_rank>} object contains a vector called
@code{ascendingFlag} which indicates whether each dimension is stored
ascending (@code{true}) or descending (@code{false}).  To alter the contents
of this vector, use the @code{ascendingFlag()} method:

@example
// Store the third dimension in descending order
storage.ascendingFlag() = true, true, false;

// Store all the dimensions in descending order
storage.ascendingFlag() = false, false, false;
@end example

@unnumberedsubsubsec Setting the base vector

@code{GeneralArrayStorage<N_rank>} also has a @code{base} vector which
contains the base index value for each dimension.  By default, the base
vector is set to zero.  @code{FortranArray<N_rank>} sets the base vector to
one.  

To set your own set of bases, you have two choices:

@itemize @bullet

@item       You can modify the @code{base} vector inside the
@code{GeneralArrayStorage<N_rank>} object.  The method @code{base()} returns
a mutable reference to the @code{base} vector which you can use to set the
bases.

@item       You can provide a set of @code{Range} arguments to the
@code{Array} constructor.

@end itemize

Here are some examples of the first approach:

@example
// Set all bases equal to 5
storage.base() = 5;    

// Set the bases to [ 1 0 1 ]
storage.base() = 1, 0, 1;
@end example

And of the second approach:

@example
// Have bases of 5, but otherwise C-style storage
Array<int,3> A(Range(5,7), Range(5,7), Range(5,7));

// Have bases of [ 1 0 1 ] and use a custom storage
Array<int,3> B(Range(1,4), Range(0,3), Range(1,4), storage);
@end example

@unnumberedsubsubsec Working simultaneously with different storage orders

Once you have created an array object, you will probably never have to worry
about its storage order.  Blitz++ should handle arrays of different storage
orders transparently.  It's possible to mix arrays of different storage
orders in one expression, and still get the correct result.

Note however, that mixing different storage orders in an expression may
incur a performance penalty, since Blitz++ will have to pay more attention
to differences in indexing than it normally would.

You may not mix arrays with different domains in the same expression.  For
example, adding a base zero to a base one array is a no-no.  The reason for
this restriction is that certain expressions become ambiguous, for example:

@example
Array<int,1> A(Range(0,5)), B(Range(1,6));
A=0;
B=0;
using namespace blitz::tensor;
int result = sum(A+B+i);
@end example

Should the index @code{i} take its domain from array @code{A} or array
@code{B}?  To avoid such ambiguities, users are forbidden from mixing arrays
with different domains in an expression. 

@unnumberedsubsubsec Debug dumps of storage order information
    
In debug mode (@code{-DBZ_DEBUG}), class @code{Array} provides a member
function @code{dumpStructureInformation()} which displays information about
the array storage:

@example
Array<float,4> A(3,7,8,2,FortranArray<4>());
A.dumpStructureInformation(cerr);
@end example

The optional argument is an @code{ostream} to dump information to.  It
defaults to @code{cout}.  Here's the output:

@smallexample
@include examples/dump.out
@end smallexample

@unnumberedsubsubsec A note about storage orders and initialization

When initializing arrays with comma delimited lists, note that the array is
filled in storage order: from the first memory location to the last memory
location.  This won't cause any problems if you stick with C-style arrays,
but it can be confusing for Fortran-style arrays:

@example
Array<int,2> A(3, 3, FortranArray<2>());
A = 1, 2, 3,
    4, 5, 6,
    7, 8, 9;
cout << A << endl;
@end example

The output from this code excerpt will be:

@example
A = 3 x 3
         1         4         7 
         2         5         8
         3         6         9
@end example

This is because Fortran-style arrays are stored in column
major order.

@subsection Storage orders example

@smallexample
@include examples/storage.texi
@end smallexample

And the output:

@smallexample
@include examples/storage.out
@end smallexample

