
@node help, , legal, Introduction
@section Mailing lists and support

@subsection How to get help
@cindex help, obtaining
@cindex support, obtaining

The starting point for all bug reports, feature requests and support
questions is the SourceForge Blitz++ project web page, at
@uref{http://sourceforge.net/projects/blitz}.  From this page, you can 
click on the Support link to browse previous Blitz++ support requests
or make your own request.

There is also a Lists link that provides access to and lets you search
the blitz mailing list archives.  This will often turn up answers to your 
question if it has been asked before.  Finally, if you continue to experience
a problem with using Blitz++, there is a Bugs link that allows you to file
a bug report and check the status of existing bug reports.

@subsection How to subscribe to a mailing list
@cindex mailing lists

The main mailing list for Blitz++ support questions and information is
@email{blitz-support@@lists.sourceforge.net}.  Anyone is free to post a 
question to this list, although the list is moderated.  You can subscribe
to the list via the Lists link on the SourceForge Blitz++ project page,
@uref{http://sourceforge.net/projects/blitz}.  Besides the main support list,
there is also a @code{blitz-devel} list for comments or questions about future 
development of Blitz++ and a @code{blitz-cvs} list that sends notification of 
changes to the Blitz++ cvs repository.  These lists generally have far less
traffic than the @code{blitz-support} list.

@subsection blitz-devel
@cindex blitz-devel list
@cindex contributing to Blitz++

Blitz++ is in open development: anyone can contribute features and code to
the library.  If you are interested in helping out with coding or porting,
you should start by subscribing to the @code{blitz-devel} mailing list.  

This list is also an appropriate place to send suggestions for features;
just send email to @email{blitz-devel@@lists.sourceforge.net}.  We can't 
implement it if you don't suggest it.

Archives of this list are available from the Blitz++ web site.

@subsection blitz-support
@cindex blitz-support list

This mailing list is for posting and answering questions about using the
Blitz++ library.  Anyone can post questions; anyone can answer.

